 AI enables computers and machines to simulate human learning, comprehension, problem solving, decision making, creativity and autonomy . In 2024, most AI researchers, practitioners and most AI-related headlines are focused on breakthroughs in gen AI, a technology that can create original text, images, video and other content .
 You are subscribed to the Think newsletter . Use our email to validate you are who you say you are, to create your IBMid, and to contact you for account related matters . Your subscription will be delivered in English. You will find an unsubscribe link in every newsletter.
 AI is as a series of nested or derivative concepts that have emerged over more than 70 years: machine learning . Machine learning is a broad range of techniques that enable computers to learn from and make inferences based on data without being explicitly programmed for specific tasks .
 A neural network consists of interconnected layers of nodes (analogous to neurons) that work together to process and analyze complex data . Deep learning is a subset of machine learning that uses multayered neural networks, called deep neural networks . The goal is for the model to learn the mapping between inputs and outputs in the training data .
 Deep learning doesn’t require human intervention, it enables machine learning at a tremendous scale . It is well suited to natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision . Some form of deep learning powers most of the artificial intelligence (AI) applications in our lives today .
 Generative AI, sometimes called "gen AI," can create complex original content such as long-form text, high-quality images, realistic video or audio and more in response to a user’s prompt or request . Self-supervised learning, which generates implicit labels from unstructured data, rather than relying on labeled data sets for supervisory signals . Reinforcement learning, in which learns by trial-and-error and reward functions rather than by extracting information from hidden patterns .
 The evolution of deep learning models coincided with the emergence of three sophisticated deep learning model types: Variational autoencoders, Transformers and Diffusion models . Transformers are at the core of most of today’s headline-making generative AI tools, including ChatGPT and GPT-4 .
 The most common foundation models today are large language models (LLMs) Large language models are created for text generation applications . There are also foundation models for image, video, sound or music generation, and multimodal models that support several kinds of content .
 Training process is compute-intensive, time-consuming and expensive . It requires thousands of clustered graphics processing units (GPUs) and weeks of processing . Open source foundation model projects, such as Meta's Llama-2, enable developers to avoid this step and its costs .
 Developers and users regularly assess the outputs of their generative AI apps and tune the model even as often as once a week for greater accuracy or relevance . The foundation model itself is updated much less frequently, perhaps every year or 18 months . Another option for improving a gen AI app's performance is retrieval augmented generation(RAG)
 AI agents exhibit autonomy, goal-driven behavior and adaptability to changing circumstances . Agentic AI is a system of multiple AI agents, coordinated, or orchestrated, to accomplish a more complex task or a greater goal than any single agent in the system could accomplish .
 AI offers numerous benefits across various industries and applications . Automation of repetitive tasks frees to work on higher value, more creative work . AI enables faster, more accurate predictions and reliable, data-driven decisions . Combined with automation, AI enables businesses to act on opportunities and respond to crise .
 AI can reduce human errors in various ways, from guiding people through the proper steps of a process, to flagging potential errors before they occur . This is especially important in industries such as healthcare where, for example, AI-guided surgical robotics enable consistent precision .
 AI can eliminate the need to put human workers at risk of injury or worse . Self-driving cars and other vehicles offer the potential to reduce the risk of injuring passengers . Chatbots and virtual assistants enable always-on support, provide faster answers to frequently asked questions .
 Machine learning and deep learning algorithms can analyze transaction patterns and flag anomalies that indicate fraudulent transactions . This enables organizations to respond more quickly to potential fraud and limit its impact . Retailers, banks and other customer-facing companies can use AI to create personalized customer experiences and marketing campaigns that delight customers .
 Machine learning models can analyze data from sensors, Internet of Things (IoT) devices and operational technology (OT) to forecast when maintenance will be required and predict equipment failur . eamline hiring by screening resumes, matching candidates with job descriptions, and even conducting preliminary interviews using video analysis .
 Organizations are scrambling to take advantage of the latest AI technologies and capitalize on AI's many benefits . But adopting and maintaining AI workflows comes with challenges and risks . Organizations can mitigate these risks by implementing security and availability throughout the entire AI lifecycle .
 AI ethics is a multidisciplinary field that studies how to optimize AI's beneficial impact while reducing risks and adverse outcomes . Organizations don’t prioritize safety and ethics when developing and deploying AI systems, they risk committing privacy violations and producing biased outcomes .
 An ethical approach to AI governance requires the involvement of a wide range of stakeholders, including developers, users, policymakers and ethicists . Here are common values associated with AI ethics and responsible AI: Explainable AI, fairness and inclusion .
 Robust AI effectively handles exceptional conditions, such as abnormalities in input or malicious attacks, without causing unintentional harm . It is also built to withstand intentional and unintentional interference by protecting against exposed vulnerabilities . Organizations should implement clear responsibilities and governance structures for the development, deployment and outcomes of AI systems .
 In order to contextualize the use of AI at various levels of complexity and sophistication, researchers have defined several types of AI that refer to its level of sophistication: weak AI, narrow AI, weak AI or strong AI . It is crucial to be able to protect AI models that might contain personal information, control what data goes into the model in the first place .
 Researchers argue that if AGI is even possible, it requires major increases in computing power . Self-aware AI systems of science fiction remain firmly in that realm . This level of AI is currently theoretical and no known AI systems approach this level of sophistication .
 John McCarthy coined the term "artificial intelligence" at the first-ever AI conference at Dartmouth College . In 1967, Frank Rosenblatt builds the Mark 1 Perceptron, the first computer based on a neural network that "learned" through trial and error . Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert published a book titled Perceptrons, which became the landmark work on neural networks .
 In 1995, Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig publish one of the leading textbooks in the study of AI: A Modern Approach . The era of big data and cloud computing is underway, enabling organizations to manage ever-larger data estates, which will one day be used to train AI models .
 Deep-learning models can be pretrained on large amounts of data . Multimodal models that can take multiple types of data as input are providing richer, more robust experiences . Smaller models are also making strides in an age of diminishi AI .
 Unpacking the agentic AI journey: what delivers, what distracts, and what deserves your investment . Join us to explore where AI is already delivering measurable value, where the technology is still evolving, and how to prioritize investments that align with your organization's strategic goals .
 Learn how to use agentic AI to help your organization . Use the Gartner’s guide to learn the potential opportunities and risks of AI for IT leaders and how to prepare for this next wave of innovation . Learn more about the benefits of using AI in the workplace .
 IBM has been recognized as a Leader in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for Data Science and Machine Learning Platforms . The 2025 CEO’s guide: 5 mindshifts to supercharge business growth with agentic AI . Explore language, code, time series and guardrail options .
 The guide focuses on the three critical elements of a strong AI strategy: creating a competitive edge, scaling AI across the business and advancing trustworthy AI . The guide is available to download and test IBM's AI expertise and portfolio of solutions at your side .
 IBM's website domains include ibm.com, ibm-zcouncil.org, insights-on-business.com and jazz.net .IBM.com is the largest provider of automation solutions in the U.S. automation solutions .
 Our websites require some cookies to function properly (required) In addition, other cookies may be used with your consent to analyze site usage, improve the user experience and for advertising . By visiting our website, you agree to our processing of information as described in IBM’s privacy statement .